Title: 2606.29859v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.29859v1

Published Time: Tue, 30 Jun 2026 01:47:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
1

# Exploring Motivations for Algorithm Mention in the Domain 

# of Natural Language Processing : A Deep Learning Approach       

> Yuzhuo Wang 1, Yi Xiang 2,Chengzhi Zhang 2
> 1. School of Management, Anhui University, Hefei, 230601, China,
> 2. School of Economics and Management, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing,
> 210094, Jiangsu

Abstract : With the formation of the fourth paradigm of scientific research, algo rithms have 

become increasingly important in scientific research. In academic papers, algorithms may 

be mentioned by scholars with various motivations, using, comparing , or improving 

algorithms to solve complex research task s. Identifying the se motivations can help scholars 

discover the relationships between algorithms and further assess their roles and values. 

Therefore, taking the field of natural language processing (NLP) as an example, this article 

proposes a complete method to conduct the identificatio n, distribution , and evolution of 

motivations for mentioning algorithms at the sentence level . Specifically, using manual 

annotation and machine learning methods, we identify algorithm entities and sentences in 

the full text of papers, classif y motivations for mentioning algorithms by pre -training 

models and data augmentation techniques, and finally analyze the distribution and 

evolution of motivations. The results show that the deep learning model s trained with the 

augmented data outperform the traditional machine learning model s in the classification 

task. In academic papers, more than half of the sentences show the direct use of algorithm s,

while the l owe st percentage of motiv ations are improving a lgorithm s, and t he diversity of 

motivations has been increasing with time. For specific algorithms, grammatical 

algorithms are mentioned more by the motivation of “description, ” while more motivations 

of “us e” are found in the machine learning algorithms c ategory . As time passed, the “use” 

motivations gradually replaced the “description” motivations for different algorithms, and 

the number of motivation types decreased significantly. Our research explores the 

identification, distribution , and evolution of authors’ motivations for mentioning algorithm 

entities, which could provide a basis for future algorithm relationship identification and 

influence evaluation using motivations. 

Keywords: Full -text content, Algorithm entities, Automatic motivation categorization ,

Deep Learning 

# 1. Introduction 

Nowadays, AI (Artificial Intelligence) technology is rapidly changing how humans work, 

learn, and live at an astonishing pace (Azoulay, 2019) , on which algorithms, computing 

power, data, and knowledge are regarded as the four core elements driving technological 

advancements (Tang, 2021; ByteBridge, 2021; Deng et al., 2020) . Among these four 

elements in the era of AI, algorithms stand out as particularly important because using 

computer s, anytime and anywhere, relies on algorithms, and the revelation of “indirect and 

implicit ” associations between data and knowledge also depends on algorithms (Hickman, 

2013) . In scientific research, algorithms are a crucial focus. With the emergence of the 2

fourth scientific paradigm, data -driven research places higher and greater demands on 

algorithms, which need continuou s optimization and innovation to identify, process, and 

analyze massive amounts of data (Balcan, 2020; Gupta & Roughgarden, 2020) . Algorithms 

also serve as essential research tools, assisting scientists in more efficiently addressing 

various scientific challenges, whether in the humanities and social sciences or the natural 

sciences (Abbott, 2017; Kogan et al., 2021) .

As a significant scientific product, algorithms have been created, mentioned, used, and 

discussed in many research papers, and their importance in the knowledge dissemination 

process is gaining attention from scientists (Zhang et al., 2023) . Previous work has 

explored the evolution path (Zha et al., 2019) and academic influence (Ding et al., 2019) 

of algorithms using full -text research papers, helping scholars to understand and select 

algorithms. However , when investigating algorithms in academic texts, scholars main ly 

focus on syntactic content, such as whether an algorithm is mentioned, its mention location, 

mention frequency, etc., while neglecting the rich semantic information that academic texts 

attr ibute to different algorithms. Specifically, even if algorithms are mentioned with the 

same frequency in the same section, there can be differences in how authors depict their 

emotions, functions, and purposes: Some algorithms are introduced as background, while 

others are directly used to solve the problems, and some algorithms are not only used but 

also improved as baselines or compared with other algorithms. If we decipher the semantic 

nuances of texts where algorithms are mentioned , researchers will get a more profound 

insight into algorithms’ interrelationships, prominence, and academic influence . Therefore, 

we probe the semantic characteristics of algorithms within academic publications by 

analyzing authors’ motivations for mentioning them. Based on th ese intricate motivations, 

we can find the disparities in the significance and evolution of various algorithms, which 

could pave the way for enriched perspectives in forthcoming endeavors related to algorithm 

evaluations, retrievals, and recommendations. 

Taking the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP) as an example, we extract 

algorithms from academic papers and automatically classify the motivations behind their 

mentions. Subsequently, we explore the distribution and evolution of motivations within 

the domain and specific algorithms . The definition of an algorithm evolves, in context, and 

in the target audience (Blass and Gurevich, 2004 ; Lum and Chowdhury, 2021) . It rang es 

from considering an algorithm as a program (Cooper, 1969) to a set of rules (Stone, 1971) 

and a method of data analysis in the AI domain (Genics, 2019) . Cormen et al. (2009) 

provided a more detailed definit ion of algorithms in the computer science domain :

“Informally, an algorithm is any well -deified computational procedure that takes some 

value, or set of values, as input and produces some value, or set of values, as output. ”, 

which inspired our approach to defining algorithms, as we focus on algorithms in the NLP 

domain. Moreover, considering the close relationship between machine learning 

algorithms and machine learning models, models that essentially have an input -output 

process similar to algorithms, or those that include algorithms, are also considered as 

algorithms. Therefore, this paper argues that in the field of NLP, an algorithm refers to an 

operational process that incorporates a set of inputs and outputs and that is explicit and 

efficient, incorporating some of the machine learning models, but distinct from software 

and application systems. Furthermore, algorithms are mentioned in various forms within 

academic papers. One form is algorithm metadata, which includes specific descriptions of 

algorithm procedures or pseudo -code within the paper (See Figure 1). The other form 3

refers to algorithm entities, which are nouns or noun phrases used to denote algorithms. 

This study focuses on the latter, specifically identifying and discussing the motivations 

behind mentions of algorithm entities in academic papers. 

Figure 1. Algorithm metadata in sentence form and pseudo -code form (Guha & 

> Koudas, 2002)

Using algorithms in the domain of NLP as our focal point, this paper pioneers exploring 

how specific algo rithm entities are mentioned in academic research. Our work has made 

the following contributions: First, unlike conventional research , which identif ies 

motivation for citing literature, we target a more nuanced understanding of knowledge used 

pattern s in academic research. Based on the deep learning methods, we encompass a

holistic research trajectory, from data acquisition to motivation categorization and analysis, 

using algorithms as examples to provide scholars with a new perspective on dissecting the 

ap plication of knowledge in academic research. Second, we discern patterns in scholars’ 

algorithm applications by scrutinizing the rationales behind algorithm mentions in specific 

domai ns. Such insights pave the way for recognizing shifts in research paradigms and 

evolving requirement s in the NLP domain . Third , by charting the trajectory of algorithm s

mentioning motivations , from their introduction, us e, comparison, and improve ment, we 

can understand the process of their emergence, development, and decline, which equips 

scholars with tools for a more thorough relational investigation and impact assessment of 

algorithms in future studies. 

# 2. Related work 

Using the content of academic paper s, we identified and classif ied the motivations of 

algorithm mention s. In this section, we introduce d two aspects of related work: one focuse d

on exploring algorithms mentioned in academic papers using full -text content , and the 

other addresse d the work re lated to citation motivations in academic papers. 

2.1 Explor ations of algorithms mentioned in academic papers 

Algorithms have become essential subjects and tools in research across various fields. The 

availability of full -text content and advancements in text mining technology have made it 

possible to access algorithms mentioned on a large scale, providing resourc es for further 

exploration of algorithms’ role, value, and impact in academic research. Current research 

on algorithms mentioned in academic papers includes algorithm recognition, algorithm 

mention frequencies, locations, and algorithm relationship evoluti on. 4

Essential algorithm recognition is carried out using rule -based methods, where scholars 

can construct rules based on the text features of algorithm metadata. For instance, Bhatia 

et al. (2011) used regular expressions to identify algorithm pseudo -code titles in papers, 

confirming the location of pseudo -code and then extracting it . Wang and Zhang (2018) 

focused on algorithm entities, constructed an abbreviation and alias dictionary for the top -

ten text mining algorithm , and extracted these algorithms from academic papers using 

dictionary matching. After that, they summarized sentence patterns for mentioning data 

mining algorithms and used these patterns to identify other types of method entities in 

article s (Wang & Zhang, 2019) . However, the ways of describing algorithms in academic 

papers are not consistent. Tuarob et al. (2013) found that approximately 26% of algorithm 

pseudo -code does not include a title, so existing rules were unsuitable for handling new 

mention patterns ; they subsequently used a combined approach of rule -based methods and 

statistical machine learning to extract algorithm pseudo -code. However, the feature 

engineering required by statistical machine learning methods requires substantia l

construction costs . Safder et al. (2020) attempted to use deep neural network models to 

identify metadata sentences that describe algorithms that no longer rel y on manually 

constructed features, and it achieved a 16% increase in ac curacy compared to the best 

statistical model. Integrated methods have also been employed for extracting algorithm 

entities, Wang et al. (2021) used the integrated statistical machine learning and deep 

learning model in their research, where Bi -LSTM +CRF significantly improved extraction 

effectiveness compared to the single model. 

After identifying algorithm metadata and algorithm entities, scholars furthe r analyzed 

different features of algorithms in academic papers . Some studies focus on algorithm 

sentences ; for example, Tuarob et al. (2006) used statistical machine learning methods and 

neural network models to classify the citation functi ons expressed in algorithm citation 

sentences. Other scholars research on individual algorithm entities. Wang et al. (2018) 

counted the mention frequency of the top ten data mining algorithms and analyzed the 

depth and breadth of academic influence. Next, they further identified the locations where 

algorithms are mention ed and found that algorithm entities primarily appeared in the 

“Method ” and “Introduction ” sections. Subsequently, they incorporated time into the 

syntactic features of algorithm mentions and discussed the evolutionary trends of algorithm 

academic impact (Wang & Zhang, 2020) . Beyond individual algorithm entities, scholars 

further investigated relationships between algorithm entities. Zha et al. (2019) studied 

hierarchical relationship s and comparative relationships between algorithm entities, 

creating evolutionary graphs for algorithms within the same category. 

2.2 Motivation analysis based on the content of academic papers 

Existing research on authors’ motivations in academic papers is concentrated on 

identifying the motivations of citation content . The primary step is developing category 

frameworks aimed at classifying these motivations . As early as the 1960s, Garfield (1964) 

outlined a comprehensive taxonomy of fifteen citation motivations among researchers. 

Subsequently, Moravcsik and Murugesan (1975) condensed disparate citation motivations 

into four binary classification categories: conceptual or operational, organic or perfunctory, 

evolutionary or juxta positional, and confirmative or negational, and then classified 

motivations based on the citation content. In addition to the citation content , some scholars 

directly corresponded with the original authors to construct the motivation pattern s. 5

Vinkler (1987) , for instance, employed a questionnaire -based approach to investigate the 

citation behaviors of twenty scholars, thereby classifying citation motivations into 

prof essional motivations, connectional motivations, and negative motivations, 

encompassing both adversarial and apathetic motivations. The above research implicitly 

assume s that scholars engage in citation practices earnestly and effectively. However, 

Thorne (1977) posit ed a contrasting perspective, suggesting that authors may cite irrelevant 

literature for variou s reasons. Building upon the foundational research, Teufel et al . (2006) 

extended the understanding of citation motivations and sentiments by classifying these 

motivations into four overarching categories and twelve subcategories, further grouping 

these twelve criteria into three broader categories: negative, neutral, and positive 

motivations. 

According to the classification framework, scholars classify the motivations manually 

or automatically . Some researchers used interviews or questionnaires to survey the authors 

and obtain their reasons for citing specific references (Harwood, 2009) . Nevertheless, the 

manual method is challenging to impleme nt , and yields limited data due to its complex 

processes and labor -intensive nature. Some scholars turned to manual annotation of citation 

content to identify citation motivations , which streamlines the data acquisition process but 

still faces constraints regarding data volume, processing speed, and scalability (Moravcsik 

& Murugesan, 1975) . Researchers increasingly explored automated ways for larger -scale 

data processes to overcome the limitations of manual method s. Garzone and Mercer (2000) 

were pioneers in using a rule -based approach ; they developed 15 lexical matching rules 

and 14 extraction rules, achieving commendable results at the time. Subsequently, scholars 

ventured into machine learning, where traditional approaches focused on feature extraction 

and expansion. For instance, Teu fel et al. (2006) extracted various features, including clue 

words and verb tenses, from citation contexts and combined these features with the IBK 

algorithm . Abu -Jbara et al. (2013) highlighted the significance of lexical and structural 

features in the classification process and underscored that support vector machines 

outperformed other statistical machine learning methods. Jurgens et al. (2018) expanded 

the features into three categories , and the combination of “pattern -based features, topic -

based features, and prototype parameter features ” resulted in a macro -F1 score of 54.6% 

on the ACL -ARC dataset. Recognizing the time -consuming nature of feature engineering, 

Su et al. (2019) proposed a single -layer convolutional neural network as a more efficient 

alternative, yielding superior results. Cohan et al. (2019) then integrated 100 -dimensional 

GloVe vectors trained on the Wikipedia corpus as word embeddings, which were combined 

with ELMO vectors for textual representations. They harness ed the Bi -LSTM model to 

perform citation motivation analysis on the ACL -ARC dataset, achieving a notable macro 

F1 score of 67.9%. Based on the identified citation motivations , scholars further evaluated 

the cited objects, including differences in their con tributions, disruption, and the reasons 

for the differences (Hou et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023) .

Upon reviewing the relevant work, it is evident that scholars have employed various 

strategies for identifying algorithm s and their features mentioned in full -text academic 

papers. However, current research treated algorithms mentioned within the same article as 

equivalent entities, disregarding the semantic information within the textual context of 

algorithms, and diverse intentions underlying scholars ’ mention. Regarding the research 

on authors’ motivation expressed in the paper content , the attentio n centered on citation 

motivations. Various methods were employed for motivation categorization, including 6

social surveys, rule -based classification, and machine learning models . The result for 

automatic motivation classification still hover ed at around a 70% F1 score, necessitating 

substantial training data. Therefore, this paper explored the authors’ motivations for 

mentioning algorithm entities in academic papers, which was called mention ing 

motivations. We incorporat ed pre -trained models and data augmentation techniques to 

enhance classification effectiveness while reducing resource demands. Furthermore, we 

analyze d the feature s of motivations mentioning algorithms , aiming to shed light on the 

roles of algorithms within academic research from a motivational perspective. 

# 3. Method ology 

Figure 2. Flow chart of the motivation classification and analysis 

Full -text content of articles 

(1979 -2015) 

Algorithm entities & 

algorithm sentences 

(1979 -2015) 

Full -text content of 

articles (2016 -20 20 )

Best classification 

model 

Extracted  entities 

(2016 -2020) 

Algorithm entities & algorithm 

Sentences  (1979 -2020) 

Training data for 

motivation classification 

Data without 

motivation 

Random Forest, 

Logistic 

Regression, Naive 

Bayes, Support 

Vector Machine 

Statistical machine 

learning 

BERT ,

Sci BERT ,

XLNet , T5 

Deep learning 

All algorithm sentence with 

identified motivation 

Manual annotation 

Results of 

classification models 

Motivation distribution 

of all algorithms 

Motivation evolution 

of single algorithms 

Rule -based filtering & 

manual annotation 

Model 

training 

Data collection 

Algorithm entities 

and sentences 

extraction 

Motivation 

classification 

Result  analysis 7

We first automatically extracted algorithm entities and constructed algorithm dictionaries, 

then used the dictionary matching method to obtain sentences mentioning algorithm 

entities from papers. Based on the algorithm sentences, we built a type framework for 

identifying authors’ motivations and annotated motivations of some algorithm sentences 

as a training corpus. Afterward, we trained various machine learning models to recognize 

the motivations in the remaining algorithm sentences for the subsequent anal ysis. The 

overall flow of our study is shown in Figure 2. 

3.1 Collecting full -text content of academic paper s

We opted to utilize the conference papers from the Association for Computational 

Linguistics (ACL) as the foundational dataset, because , within the discipline of computer 

science, there ’s a prevailing emphasis on disseminating recent findings via academic 

conferences over traditional journals (Qian et al., 2017) . Of the myriad conferences 

dedicated to NLP, the ACL emerges as a seminal forum. The corpus of papers presented 

at ACL exemplifies the zenith of contemporary NLP research and encompasses a broad 

spectrum of sophisticated algorithms. While there are other esteemed NLP conferences, 

such as EMNLP (Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing) and NAACL 

(Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational 

Linguistics), the ACL boasts an uninterrupted sequence of events, thereby ensu ring a

consistent trajectory of research data, making it an ideal source for evolutionary analysis. 

We downloaded all data from the ACL Anthology Reference Corpus (https://acl -

arc.comp.nus.edu.sg/ ) and the ACL Anthology Repository (https://github.com/acl -org/acl -

anthology ), which provide d full -text papers from two distinct periods: 1979 -2015 and 

2016 -2020. During our preliminary data processing, we discerned certain anomalies in 

content and formatting within the XML datasets ; therefore, we invited six undergraduate 

students to isolate these papers, which was followed by rigorous manual scrutiny and 

content correction by juxtaposing th e XML data against the original PDF manuscripts. 

3.2 Recognizing algorithm entit ies and algorithm sentence s

We trained different models and then used the best model to extract entities that may be 

algorithms (candidate entities) from the raw corpus. Rule -based filtering and manual 

evaluation were employed to find the entity words that are explicitly algorithms from the 

candidate list. We then used lexicon matching to obtain all the sentences mentioning these 

al gorithm entities (algorithm sentences ) and used them for the subsequent motivation 

categorization. 

(1) Algorithm entit ies extraction 

Wang and Zhang ( 2020) conducted a manual annotation of the ACL conference papers 

spanning from 1979 to 2015. Their efforts yielded 877 algorithms with 1840 distinct 

algorithm names and 60,662 algorithm sentences, which were utilized as our foundational 

training corpus . Specifically, For the separate extraction models, i.e., CRF and Bi -LSTM, 

we randomly divide d the data into training and test sets in the ratio of 20% and 80%, and 

test ed the performance of the models using 10 -fold cross -validation. For the other 

integrated model, we partitioned the data into training, testing, and validation sets at ratios 

of 70%, 15%, and 15%, respectively . The performance of each model based on training 8

data is tabulated in Table 1, where the performance of a single model is measured by the 

average of results at each fold. The performance of single models measured by the standard 

deviation of metrics, and the performance of integrated models on the train ing and 

validation sets are documented in Table A, Table B, and Table C in Appendix section ,

respectively . It can be seen that deep learning models outperformed traditional machine 

learning models , and integrated models showcased enhanced performance compared to 

their singular counterparts.                    

> Table 1. The performance of extraction models
> Model Precision Recall F1
> CRF 0.766 0.823 0.792
> Bi -LSTM 0.842 0.845 0.842
> Bi -LSTM+CRF 0.872 0.901 0.886
> BERT+CRF 0.953 0.962 0.957
> BERT+Bi -LSTM+CRF 0.970 0.959 0.964

Owing to the stellar performance, we selected the BERT+Bi -LSTM+CRF to process the 

raw corpus , which includes two parts. Part I: 625,445 sentences , excluding the previously 

labeled algorithm sentences in ACL papers published from 1979 to 2015. We want ed to 

unearth potential algorithms that might be overlooked during manual annotations. Part II: 

427,470 sentences in ACL papers published from 2016 to 2020. Finally, we identified 

28,698 and 29,819 candidate entities from the two raw corpora .

Given the inherent challenge of ensuring 100% accuracy in the entity extraction, refining 

these words for the subsequent analysis is essential . We first removed 38,6 61 low -

frequency words that appeared in only a single sentence. Next, a doctoral student and a

master ’s student annotated a subset comprising 10% (1,779 words) of the remaining 17,778 

candidate words to determine the annotation feasibility . They achieved a kappa coefficient 

of 0.76 in the consistency test, indicating that a single, experienced annotator would be 

sufficient for the task. Consequently, the doctoral student annotated the remaining terms, 

identifying 1, 835 definitive algorithm entities and 622 uncertain entities. A professor was 

later consulted to review the ambiguous entities, further refining the list to include 412 

algorithms. 

In total, we identified 2,247 new algorithm entities. By amalgamating new entities with 

existing entities in the training corpus, we assembled 4,087 entities (without duplication) .

These entities brought three issues: First, the authors mentioned an algorithm with a dozen 

names . For example, the “support vector machine” is also called “SVM,” “support vector 

machines” and so on. Second, an entity may represent different algorithms. For example, 

“the BP algorithm” can represent either the “backpropagation” algorithm or the “belief 

propagation” algorithm. Third, an entity may denote algorithms and some other com mon 

nouns. For example, “EM” can represent either the EM algorithm or the M entity (e 1, e1, …, 

em). 

For the first problem, we categorized all the entities into full -name type and acronyms 

type , based on word length and manual review. We used the edit dista nce algorithm for 

full -name words to assess the similarity between different names. If the similarity exceeded 

95%, we considered them references to the same algorithm. We then manually reviewed 

these sets and chose the longest word as the standard name fo r the algorithm. A full -name 

dictionary containing 1,6 52 groups with the standard name and alias was compiled. 9

Abbreviations cause the other two problems. We extracted the original sentence 

mentioning the acronym and matched the full -name words that appear ed in the same 

sentence. We first determined whether these full -names and acronyms represented the 

same algorithm by two rule s: firstly, the full -name word appeared in brackets after the 

acronym or vice versa; secondly, the full -name words had the same com bination of initial 

letters as the acronyms, and then we conducted a round of manual review. If the full names 

were not in the same sentence, we would expand the search range to the three sentences 

before and after. If the above methods were ineffective, w e would resort to a manual search 

in the original article. An acronym dictionary was constructed in which the standard name s

corresponding to each acronym were categorized into groups. 

After the processing above , t he finalized dictionary encompasses 1,652 standard 

algorithm entities and 3,810 algorithmic entity names .

(2) Algorithm sentence s matching 

Utilizing a dictionary -based approach, we obtained 172,560 sentences mentioning 

algorithm entities. However, given the prevalence of acronyms, ambiguities arose post -

matching. The first kind of ambiguity is that the abbreviation is not an accurate algorithm. 

For instance, “CNN ” in a sentence was the “Cable News Network ” rather than the 

“Convolutional Neural Networks .” Second, the abbreviation could represent multiple 

algorithms. For example, “L -CRF” in a sentence is needed to determin e whether it is 

“Lifelong CRF ” or “linear -chain CRF .” Ultimately, we obtained 110,345 sentences 

containing specific algorithm entities that have been disambiguated. We use d the 

abbreviation dictionary mentioned above to clarify which full name a particular 

abbreviation in the sentence refers to. If the abbre viation and its full name appear in the 

same sentence, we replace the abbreviation with the full name. If not, we expand the search 

range or resort to manual processing. 

3.3 Annotating the training data for motivation classification 

Drawing upon the exist ing classifications for algorithm citation motivations (Tuarob et al., 

2019) , this study conducted an in -depth examination of algorithm sentences within ACL 

papers . We consider identifying the motiv ation s for which an algorithm is mentioned from 

the sentence dimension rather than the article dimension since an algorithm may be 

mentioned with different motiv ation s in different sentences of an article. Based on the 

motiv ation identified from sentences, the final purpose of an algorithm mentioned in an 

article can be further obtained. We categorized mention ing motivations into two significant 

types: used and unused, and then subdivided the use into subcategories: use, compar ison ,

and improv ement. The specific definitions and examples for each category are presented 

in Table 2. The granularity of this type of framework strikes a balance , and it enables clear 

differentiation between the diverse contexts wherein algorithms are mentioned without 

introducing comple xity that might impede annotation or machine recognition. The broa der 

applicability allow ed the framework to be used for other methodological entities, such as 

dataset s, software, or evaluation metrics. 10 

Table 2. Definitions and examples of motivations for mentioning algorithm s

Type  Definition  Example 

Description 

Introducing background and 

principles about the algorithm 

and other situations where it is 

im possible to determine whether 

algorithms are being used. 

<algo>loopy belief propagation</algo> is a 

message passing algorithm for graph inference. 

Use 

Using the algorithm in the article 

without improvement or 

comparison. 

We have used Deb’s <algo>NSGA -II</algo>to 

generate sets of solutions. 

Compar ison  Using the algorithm and 

comparing it with others. 

We can also observe that the <algo>adaptive 

bootstrapping</algo> method and the rap 

method perform much better than other 

methods in terms of f -score. 

Improve ment  Modifying the algorithm and then 

using the modified version. 

We provide a novel <algo>random 

walk</algo> model on this graph that 

incorporates both topical importance of 

referring sentences as well as frequen cy and 

temporal distance of references.    

> Note :The algorithm entity in the example sentence is enclosed by “<algo></algo>”.

An algorithm can be mentioned in an article for multiple different reasons. If we were 

to annotate the motive within an article as a unit, it would not only be impossible to obtain 

a unique result but also cause significant interference with machine classification. 

Therefore, we adopt a sentence -by -sentence annotation strategy, identifying only the 

motive for mentioning the algorithm in sentence s. Subsequently, other researchers can 

conduct further exploration based on their own needs. They can select the most complex 

motive as the purpose for why the authors mentioned an algorithm or focus on the diversity 

of motivations fo r further analysis. We engaged two annotators and an expert reviewer in 

annotating the type of motivations. Specifically, one doctoral student and a senior 

undergraduate student took on the responsibility of annotation, and a professor to provide 

guidance and address any queries. 

Pre -annotation Phase: This initial phase consisted of two iterations, during which 200 

algorithm sentences were randomly picked for each round and handed over to the 

annotators for independent annotation. During the annotation proc ess, we observed that for 

each algorithm mentioned in an article, besides being directly used by the authors, they 

also appeared in existing related works, meaning the authors would mention how other 

researchers used these algorithms. For the algorithms me ntioned in this context, annotators 

conducted careful reading and judgment. If a sentence merely describes how others use the 

algorithm, then that sentence is labeled as “Description. ” However, if the author indicates 

their own use of, or improvement upon, the algorithm while describing how others use it, 

then that sentence is labeled “Use ” or “Improvement. ” The interrater reliability ascertained 

by Cohen’s kappa coefficient achieved 0.80 , confirm ing that the annotators were 

competent for separate annotations and that the results were depend able. 

Main annotation Phase: From the amassed 107,554 algorithm sentences, 6,000 

sentences were extracted based on the distribution across articles. These sentences were 

evenly divided between the two annotators and assigned a motivation for mentioning the m. 

Sentences posing ambiguity regarding the motivational type were escalated to the expert 

reviewer , and the final decisions on such sentences were reached collaboratively. 11 

Annotation Outcomes: Among the 6,400 algorithm sentences that emerged from the 

anno tation phases, 79 sentences were discarded due to encoding errors. A unique 

observation was that specific algorithm sentences mentioned multiple algorithms, but not 

all these algorithms shared the same motivation. For instance, in the sentence “We applied 

a modified version of the HITS algorithm and an SVM trained with pseudo -relevant data 

for article analysis ,” HITS is noted as a modified version, while SVM is indicated as 

directly used. Of the 6,321 retained sentences, 60 exhibited diverse motivations, in cluding 

37 sentences where a single algorithm had varied motivations and 23 sentences where 

multiple algorithms had divergent motivations. Given that such sentences constituted less 

than 1% of the entire corpus , a figure unlikely to impact the outcomes sub stantially, they 

were excluded. Ultimately, 6,261 algorithm sentences, each tagged with a specific 

motivation, were retained. Table 3 provides a breakdown of sentences by their motivation 

type.        

> Table 3. The n umber of sentences in different categories
> Type The number of sentences
> Description 1380
> Use 3800
> Comparison 642
> Improve ment 439
> Total 6261

3.4 Classifying the motivation of sentences mentioning algorithms 

We employed traditional machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) models for 

motivation classification . Given the minimal information load within sentences , we did not 

implement data preprocessing. To be specific, four traditional text categorization models 

were chosen: Random Forest (RF) (Breiman, 2001) , Logistic Regression (LR) (Lei et al., 

2019) , Naive Bayes (NB) (Chen et al., 2009) , and Support Vector Machine (SVM) (Cortes 

& Vapnik, 1995) . Drawing upon Zhang et al. (2022) research, given the minimal 

information load within single sentences, this research utilized pre -trained models for 

subsequent classification: BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) , SciBERT (Beltagy et al., 2019) ,

XLNet (Yang et al., 2019) , and T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) .

(1) Motivation classification based on traditional machine learning methods 

During traditional machine learning model training, varied text representation techniques 

we re employed. 

ML Experiment I (One -hot text representation): This paper employed the Information 

Gain (IG) and Chi -Square Test (CHI) for feature selection. Preliminary tests revealed 

superior CHI performance, prompting its selection. Term Frequency -Inverse Document 

Freq uency (TF -IDF ) was utilized for feature weights to vectorize algorithm sentence text, 

followed by applying diverse traditional models for classification. 

We also tried several features mentioned in existing experiments on citation motivation 

classification . However, these text features didn’t significantly benefit model training. 

Specifically, we utilized features , including the sentiment score of the sentence, total word 

count, the part of speech, the tense of words, proportion of nouns, proportion of verb s, 

proportion of pronouns , et al. When all these features were considered, the best -performing 

model was RF, which achieved a macro -F1 score of 0.4445, while the worst -performing 12 

SVM only achieved a macro -F1 score of 0.2269. Therefore, these results were thus 

excluded from the paper’s discussion. 

(2) Motivation classification based on deep learning methods 

For deep learning models, the research explored training corpus expansion and trained the 

models by corpus with different sizes. 

DL Experiment I (using the original training corpus): We conducted the experiments 

using the original training corpus. Cohan et al. (2019) foun d that raw text representation 

surpasses additional feature utility for citation motivation classification. Pre -training 

models, including BERT and GPT, are designed to improve the performance of the 

downstream tasks by learning a generalized text represen tation through training on large -

scale corpora (Qiu et al., 2020) . Therefore, this phase directly identified motivations using 

fine -tuned pre -training models . Four pre -trained language models were utilized in our 

experiment , including BERT, SciBERT, XLNet, and T5. Taking the BERT model as an 

example, we used the BERT -base -uncased version provided by the Transformer library. 

The original text wa s tokenized by the tokenizer, and a special <cls> token wa s added at 

the beginning of each sentence. The token sequences of different sentences we re then 

padded to the same length, which serve d as the input to the BERT model. After passing 

through the 12 -layer Transformer structure of BERT, we obtained the 768 -dimensional 

semantic vecto rs corresponding to each token in the input sentence. We then took the 

semantic vector of the <cls> token from the last hidden state as the vector representation 

of the sentence. Finally, we employed a fully connected neural network to project the 768 -

dime nsional vector to a 4-dimensional vector representation. Each dimension represents 

the probability of belonging to different categories of motivations, with the highest 

probability indicating the inferred category by the model. Next, the cross -entropy loss 

function was used to calculate the difference between predicted and actual categories, and 

then update the weights of the entire network through the backpropagation mechanism. 

DL Experiment II (training corpus expansion via data aug mentation): To ascertain the 

data size influence on results, we used data augmentation to increase the corpus , which 

amplifies training data variety without needing new data collection (Feng et al., 2021) . In 

the NLP domain, popular strategies encompass Back Translation (Sennrich et al., 2016) ,

word substitution with language models (Kobayashi, 2018) , and so on. The data 

augmentation process is depicted in Figure 3. Initially, data wa s divided into training and 

test sets at a ratio of 80% to 20% , yielding 5008 training samples. Using the NLPAUG 

library 2, the training data was expanded by replacing the original word with synonyms and 

inserting new words. As shown in Table 4, the training set comprises 35,034 entries after 

augmentation, marking a sevenfold increase, which was then utilized to fine -tune the pre -

trained models. 13 

Figure 3. Data Augmentation of training data for motivation classification 

Table 4. Examples of sentences after data enhancement treatment 

Sentence Types  Example of augmented data 

Original Sentence  Both word embedding models are trained using the Wikipedia corpora. 

After synonym 

replacement  Both word embedding models can train with traditional Wikipedia corpora. 

After inserting new 

words 

Thus, both the word mode embedding models are trained using exactly the 

relevant Wikipedia corpora. 

# 4. Results 

This section details the outcomes of our motivation classification across various models. 

We then delv ed into the distribution traits for each kind of motiv ation . Conclusively, the 

patterns and progression of motivations mentioning different algorithm entities were 

investiga ted. 

4.1 Results of motivation classification 

Leveraging the manually labeled training corpus outlined earlier, we implement ed the 

experimental framework previously described to train traditional ML models and DL 

models and then assess their classification performance. 

(1) Performance of traditional machine learning models 

Every model undergoes experimentation using a ten -fold cross -validation, whose 

performance is the average value calculated from the results of each fold and illustrated in 

Table 5 (the standard deviation of results in each fold is shown in Table D of Appendix ).

It is evident that when employing the one -hot encoding combined with TF -IDF for text 

representation, the LR model excels, boasting an accuracy of 0.7178. The performance gap 

among SVM, LR, and NB is narrow, but RF lags noticeably behind the trio. 

Table 5. Expe rimental results based on traditional machine learning models 

Experiment  Model  Macro -P Macro -R Macro -F1

ML experiment I:

TF -IDF 

SVM  0.7160  0.5755  0.5966 

LR  0.7178  0.5879  0.6096 

NB  0.7060  0.5665  0.5892 

RF  0.6414  0.4313  0.4608 

(2) Performance of deep learning models  

> Sentences
> with
> annotated
> motivation
> Training
> data
> Test data
> Replacing
> original word s
> with synonyms
> Inserting new
> words
> Expanded
> training set
> Training
> classification
> model s

14 

The deep learning models are validated using 10 -fold cross -validation, and the ir 

performance , which is the average value calculated from the results of each fold , is shown 

in Table 6 (the standard deviation of results in each fold is shown in Table E of Appendix ).

The classification of all pre -trained models outperforms the machine learning model. When 

using only raw data, Sci BERT achieves the best results , with a macro -F1 value of 0.729 4,

which may be becaus e Sci BERT is pre -trained from a corpus of scientific literature, and it 

can represent the algorithm sentence in academic papers with more appropriate features. 

After being trained on the more extensive training data, Sci BERT is still the best -

performing model, which again validates its superiority to academic text data processing .

Compared with the previous experiment, the performance of the BERT, SciBERT, and T5 

models are further improved, with the T5 model showing a particular ly significant 

improvement. Generally, this section obtain ed the best -performing dataset and model 

combination, i.e., the SciBERT model trained on the data -augmented training set, and 

employ ed it to classify all the remaining algorithm sentences to obtain the motivation.                              

> Table 6. Experimental results based on deep learning models
> Experiment Model Macro -PMacro -RMacro -F1
> DL experiment I:
> Raw data
> BERT 0. 7021 0.72 75 0.7 087
> SciBERT 0.7 316 0. 7332 0.729 4
> XLNet 0.70 06 0.7 376 0.71 19
> T5 0. 7085 0. 7335 0. 7151
> DL experiment II:
> Augmented data
> BERT 0.7 114 0.75 07 0.72 29
> SciBERT 0.7 398 0.75 64 0.7 597
> XLNet 0.71 16 0.7 257 0.7 137
> T5 0.7 339 0.7 366 0.73 17

4.2 Distribution of different motivations in the NLP papers 

Using sentences and articles as counting units, we obtain ed the share of different categories 

of mentioning motiv ations in NLP papers. This section also shows the changes in the 

proportion of different categories and combinations of motivations over time. 

(1) The number of sentences ment ioning algorithm s with different motivations 

The data culled from the ACL papers highlights some critical trends regarding how 

algorithms are discussed and utilized within academic texts. From a pool of 107,554 

sentences that allude to algorithms, a mere 24% delineate the algorithm itself, with the 

remainder elaborating on the diverse ways to deploy algorithm s. This trend underscores 

algorithms’ instrumental role in NLP research; they are predominantly perceived as mere 

theoretical constructs and pragmatic tools aiding problem -solving. 

For the “used” category, the highest percentage of motiv ation s was “use ,” followed by 

“comparison ,” and the minimum part was “improve ment ,” which is in line with the 

findings from earlier research on algorithmic metadata (Tuarob et al., 2019) . Figure 4

shows the evolution of sentence frequency with different motivations , where “use ” is 

always the motivation with the highest percentage, while “improvement” has the lowest 

shar e. After reading some ACL papers, we speculate that the high proportion of “use ” may 

be related to top NLP conference papers focusing on algorithm proposal and us age. 

Although authors introduce some previously used algorithms in their papers, they more 15 

often mention how they utilize existing methods or create new ones and the effectiveness 

achieved (these sentences are considered evidence of the authors using algor ithms in our 

study). From 1979 to 1985 , there was an evident decline and then an increase in the rat e of 

“use ,” while the other categories of motivation showed the opposite evolution ; this 

apparent fluctuation did not occur after 1985. We think this period corresponds to the 

formative years of NLP research , where academic conventions around algorithm 

description might not have crystallized. From 1986 to 2000, the “improvement” references 

plateau ed , but other motivations witness ed minor fluctuation. Beyond the turn of the 

millennium, the proportions related to algorithm mentions stabilize d across all motivation 

categories, implying that the culture around algorithm discourse in NLP papers had reached 

a consensus. New algorithms surely burgeoned, but the reaso ns for their mentions, be it 

direct application, improvement, comparison, or brief mention, stayed consistent in 

proportion.    

> Figure 4.The percentage of sentences mentioning the algorithm with different motivations each
> year

(2) The combination of motivations of mentioning algorithm s with in papers 

To investigate the hypothesis from the preceding section regarding the multiple motivations 

for referencin g algorithms in an article, we delve d deeper into an article -centric analysis. 

Instead of counting every mention, we focus ed on whether an article contain ed a specific 

motivation for mentioning algorithms , diving further into this, we examine d the 

combination patterns of different motivations in the articles. Four distinct motivations 

result in 14 potential combinations, and the percentage of articles having different 

motivation patterns is presented in Figure 5. Predominantly, articles tend to “briefly 

mention, directly use, and comparatively assess ” different algorithms. The followin g

frequent combination is “description and use” of these algorithms. Interestingly, only 14% 

of the articles exhibit all four motivations . When narrowed down to articles with a singular 

reason, motivation “use” stands out, whereas a mere 4% of articles lack this reason .16   

> (Note:1 means the motivation of “description,” 2 means the motivation of “use,” 3 means the motivation of “comparison,” 4
> means the motivation of “improvement”)

Figure 5. The proportion of articles mentioning algorithms in different motivation combination 

patterns 

We calculated the annual percentage of papers containing different motivations to gain 

more insights into the evolution of motivation patterns . Note that we only count ed one to 

each motive , no matter how many times it appear ed in an article. Figure 6 depicts that the 

heterogeneity of reason s for mentioning algorithms has undergone a noteworthy 

transformation. Overall, in different eras, the most common motivations for mentioning 

algorithms, as well as combinations of motivations, are “comparison ,” “description, and 

use ,” and “description, use , comparison .” The proportion of articles with different numbers 

of mo tivation types shows varying trends. There’s a decline in articles containing just one 

or two kinds of motivations, particularly articles that mention various algorithms with a

single motivation , such as “use” and “comparison ,” as well as their combination . However, 

the proportion of articles with three or four kinds of motivations shows an opposite upward 

trend. The increase in three motivations is primarily due to the growth of “description, use ,

comparison .” We infer that th e growth in multiple motivatio n categories suggests the 

growing complexity of how algorithms are approached in literature . A deeper temporal 

analysis indicate s that before 200 0, there was a stark fluctuation in the number of types, 

particularly with articles having a single motivation plummeting from 50% to below 20%. 

The period from 200 0 to 2014 saw a modest decline for articles with one or two kinds of 

motivations , contrasted with an upswing for three or four types. In the post -2014 phase, 

evolution trends have evolved significantly more drastically. It becomes evident that as the 

NLP method transitioned from “syntactic class algorithms ” to “statistical machine learning ”

and subsequently to the “deep learning ” epoch, ther e was a broadening in the array of 

reasons authors had for mentioning algorithms. 

> {1, 2, 3}
> 43.40%
> {1, 2}
> 20.15%
> {1, 2, 3, 4}
> 14.00%
> {2}
> 11.35%
> {2, 3}
> 3.81%
> {1, 2, 4}
> 2.43%
> {1}
> 2.30%

17      

> (Note:1 means the motivation of “description,” 2 means the motivation of “use,” 3 means the motivation of “comparison,” 4
> means the motivation of “improvement”)
> Figure 6.The p roportion of articles mentioning algorithms with different number sof motivation
> types each year

4.3 Mentioning motivations of different type s of algorithms 

To explore the differences among algorithm classes, we select ed a hallmark algorithm from 

three distinct categories: grammatical algorithms, statistical machine learning algorithms, 

and deep learning algorithms, to trace the shifts in motivations behind mentioning these 

algorithms over time. For ea ch stage, based on the evaluation results of different algorithms ’

influence from existing works (Wang & Zhang, 2020) , we selected those with high 

influence and representative characteristics. Among grammat ical algorithms, we chose the 

Context -Free Grammar (CFG) algorithm, which was powerful enough to express the 

grammatical patterns of most programming languages (Kadle c, 2008) . The Support Vector 

Machine (SVM) was chosen to represent statistical machine learning algorithms. As 

described in the “Top 10 algorithms in data mining” (Wu et al., 2008) , the SVM has a solid 

theoretical foundation and is one of the most stable and accurate algorithms amo ng all well -

known algorithms. We chose the Recurrent neural network (RNN) from deep learning 

algorithms. The use of RNNs marked a shift in natural language processing methods 

towards nonlinear neural network models , which reduce the dependency of sequence 

tagging models on the Markov assumption and have achieved excellent performance in 

tasks like machine translation and sequence tagging. 

(1) The evolution of motivation s for mentioning CFG 

As for the grammatical algorithms, this research highlight ed the Co ntext -Free Grammar 

(CFG) algorithm , which was proposed in the 1950s . Figure 7 provides a comprehensive 

overview of its mentions. Figure 7(a) elucidates the percentage of articles referencing CFG 

based on specific motivations , while Figure 7(b) illuminates the rat e of articles containing 

different combination s of motiv ations . In the initial decade from 1979 to 1993 , CFG 

witnessed oscillations in its mentions, particularly for “description” and “use. ”

Interestingly, the proportion of articles referencing CFG for singular or multiple 

motivations was nearly identical. Notably, there is a scant representation of “improvement ”

linked to CFG, which explains the near -absence of articles embracing all four kinds of 

motivations .18 

Changes in motivation experienced a plateau from 1994 to 2013. Articles containing 

“description” of CFG saw a marked decline , primarily due to the “description and use” 

decrease . However , the motivation of “ use ” dominated, accounting for over 80% yearly. 

After 2013, the share of articles mentioning CFG in a multi -motiva tion context waned, 

especially “use and comparison ,” but singularly -motiv ation mentions for “description” or 

“use” grew. 

(a)Percentage of articl es containing different motivations   

> (Note:1 means the motivation of “description,” 2 means the motivation of “use,” 3 means the motivation of “comparison,” 4
> means the motivation of “improvement”)

(b)Percentage of articles containing different combination s of motivations 

Figure 7. Distribution of motivations mentioning CFG in different years 

(2) The evolution of motivation mentioning SVM 

We chose the support vector machine as the representative statistical machine learning 

algorithm. The SVM was first proposed in 1965 and underwent significant improvements 

in 1995, greatly enhancing its influence. Figure 8 presents the evolution of motivation for 

ment ioning SVM in academic articles. We designate d the period from 2000 to 2006 as the 

developmental phase, when the proportion of articles discussing SVM with simple 

“description, ” direct “use, ” and “comparison” motivations experienced significant 

fluctuation s. There was a noteworthy decline in the prevalence of articles with a single type 

of motivation , but the share of three kinds of motivations , mainly “description , use, 

comparison ,” increased .

Between 2007 and 2014, the “description ” category, including “description and use ” and 

“description, use and comparison ,” experienced a significant reduction. Simultaneously, 

articles discussing algorithms with “one kind ” of motivation increased, especially “use ”

and “compare ,” while the proport ion of two or three kinds of motiv ation s decreased. We 

hypothesize that as various types of deep learning algorithms emerged, SVM primarily 19 

served as a foundational benchmark for comparison. Following 2015, articles merely 

describing the algorithm became more common, but those focused on using and comparing 

SVM algorithms entered a decline phase, while the proportion of articles aiming to improve 

SVM remained essential ly unchanged. 

(a)Percentage of articles containing different motivations   

> (Note:1 means the motivation of “description,” 2 means the motivation of “use,” 3 means the motivation of “comparison,” 4
> means the motivation of “improvement”)

(b)Percentage of articles containing different number s of motivation types 

Figure 8. Distributi on of motivations mentioning SVM in different years 

(3) The evolution of motivation mentioning RNN 

We chose the Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) as a representative deep learning algorithm. 

The RNN concept was first proposed in 1986 , but it was no t until 2006, when a method for 

rapidly training deep neural networks was introduced, that RNN began to be gradually 

utilized. As depicted in Figure 9, the initial stage of RNN ’s development occurred between 

2012 and 2015, when the volatility in the propor tions of each kind of motivation was more 

pronounced than in subsequent timeframes. 

Between 2015 and 2018, the percentage of articles directly utilizing RNNs remained 

relatively stable, signifying a developmental phase. However, the share of  “description ”

and “use” experienced a notable decline after 2018 ; during this period, the proportion of 

articles containing only two single motivations increased, while those including 

“description and use” decreased. Regarding the shift in the number of motivational t ypes, 

once again using 2015 as a pivotal point, we observed a decline in single -type motivation 

and a rise in multi -type motivation during the earlier phase. Conversely, the opposite 

evolutionary trend emerged after 2015. 20    

> (a)Percentage of articles containing different motivations
> (b)Percentage of articles containing different number sof motivation types
> Figure 9. Distribution of motivations mentioning RNN in different years

# 5. Discussion 

5.1Analyzing the causes of classification errors 

In this paper, the most effective motivation classification model is SciBERT . Although the 

best model achieved the macro -F1 classification score of 0.7528 . When compared to prior 

work on the classification of algorithm metadata motivation (Tuarob et al., 2019), which 

focused on citation sentences from Citeseer and applied the statistical machine learning 

models to classify the authors' motivations for citing the algorithms. The results showed 

that the SVM classifier trained with combined content and context features was the best 

model , and it achiev ed a weighted average F1 -score of 0.748. Our results demonstrate the 

improvement, but there is still room for fur ther enhancement. We thoroughly examined 

prediction errors during both the machine training and testing phases, and then identified 

some examples to understand the causes of prediction inaccuracies. Table 7 details ten 

examples attributed to three critical kinds of errors. 

(1) Misinterpretation of core verb 

Some algorithm sentences exhibit complex semantic s. In cases where the machine fails to 

accurately comprehend the algorithm entity within the sentence and connect it with 

preceding verbs, it can lead to misclassification of motivations —for example, sentence 

eight in Table 7.21 

Example: In this paper, we present an extension by using the random walk model to 

alleviate data sparsity for sp. 

In this sentence, the authors employ ed the random walk model for an extension, rather 

than extending the random walk algorithm itself. Therefore, the correct motivation should 

be “use .” However, the machine did not accurately identify the core element of the 

sentence, namely, “using the random walk model ,” but thou ght the motivation wa s

“improvement” based on the “extension ” in the sentence. 

Table 7. Examples of motivation prediction errors 

No.  Correct 

category 

Predicted 

category  Sentence 

1 compariso 

n use 

We implemented logistic regression using l-normalization, 

finding this to outperform normalized and non -normalized 

versions. 

2 compariso 

n

descriptio 

n

We also intend to compare our approach with other machine 

learning algorithms using all the kss employed in aleph 

3 compariso 

n

improvem 

ent 

First, we extend to sentiment classification the recently proposed 

structural correspondence learning (scl ) algorithm, reducing the 

relative error due to adaptation between domains by an average 

of 3.7% over the original scl algorithm and 2.45% over a 

supervised baseline. 

4 improvem 

ent 

descriptio 

n

Then a modified iterative propagation is carried out over the 

entire graph to select the most relevant triples of background 

knowledge to the given source document. 

5 improvem 

ent  use 

In this paper, we present a novel generative bayesian model that 

learns domain/dialog act/slot semantic components as latent 

aspects of text utterances. 

6 descriptio 

n

compariso 

n There are two major differences between blasso and fslr. 

7 descriptio 

n use  This makes svm well fitted to treat classification problems 

involving relatively large feature spaces such as ours. 

8 use  improvem 

ent 

In this paper, we present an extension by using the random walk 

model to alleviate data sparsity for sp. 

9 use  descriptio 

n

We first review the path ranking algorithm (pra) as introduced by 

(lao and cohen, b), paying special attention to its random walk 

feature estimation and selection components. 

10  use  compariso 

n

We build our classification models using the support vector 

machine (svm) implementation provided by yamcha. 

(2) Difficulty in grasping complex comparatives 

When predicting sentences whose true motivation is “comparison,” the machine often 

misclassifies them into “use” due to its limited ability to understand more nuanced 

comparisons, which are exemplified by the first and third sentences in Table 7.

Example: We implemented logistic regression using L-normalization, finding this to 

outperform normalized and non -normalized versions. 

Example: First, we extend to sentiment classification the recently proposed structural 

correspondence learning (scl) algorithm, red ucing the relative error due to adaptation 

between domains by an average of 3.7% over the original scl algorithm and 2.45% over a

supervised baseline. 22 

In the first sentence, the author highlighted that logistic regression, when normalized, 

“outperforms” ot her methods. Here, “outperforms” is the pivotal term indicating a

comparison, yet the machine may struggle to discern its comparative connotation 

accurately. Similarly, in the second sentence, the author employed the phrase “reducing... 

by” to convey that the “structural correspondence learning algorithm” could reduce error 

rates and perform better than other models. The machine might not fully grasp the 

comparative aspect and erroneously interpret it as an indication of improvement. 

(3) Stru ggles with comp lex improvement te rminology 

For sentences with “improvement” motivation, the machine often grasps the usage 

motivation but falters in interpreting the improvement. Upon reviewing the content of 

misclassified sentences, we posit that this issue arises because the model can comprehend 

improvement motivations conveyed through verbs, such as “we modified XXXX 

algorithm,” but encounters challenges when improvement is expressed through adjectives, 

as seen in the fifth sentence in Table 7.

Example: In this paper, we present a novel generative Bayesian model that learns. 

In this sentence, the author use d the term “novel ” to signify an enhancement to the 

traditional “generative Bayesian model. ” However, it appears that the machine did not 

recognize the intent for improvement conveyed by the “novel ” and instead categorize d it 

as direct “use .” 

5.2 Potential applications for motivations of mentioning algorithms in academic 

papers 

This study studies the motivations for mentioning algorithm entities in academic papers. 

Interestingly, the most prevalent motive is “use, ” as observed in our randomly labeled 

training corpus and the final classification outcomes. In contrast, research on the citation 

motivation of algorithm me tadata predominantly points to a simple “description” of 

algorithms as the dominant motive (Tuarob et al., 2019) . This divergence implies that 

algorithm metadata often presents algorithms as foundational or background knowledge, 

while algorithm entities emphasize the algorithm ’s practical application as a method or tool. 

Hence, if one aims to assess the value of algorithms from the perspective of academic 

productivity, it may be pertinent to extract algorithm entities and pinpoint sentences that 

refer specifically to these entities. 

Our findings underscore the authors ’ varied objectives when discussing algorithms 

within a single paper, highlighting the distinct roles that different algorithms play. 

Therefore, when gauging the academic influence of algorithms, it might be worthwhile to 

construct factors based on the motivations to conduct a more nuanced measure. 

Furthermore, discerning the reason s for referencing algorithms can offer insights into the ir 

relationships . For instance, algorithms discussed in a comparison context may be riv als, 

whereas those in the improvement sentences might be collaborators. Additionally, our 

study reveals temporal shifts in the motivations for discussing algorithms. Over the years, 

there ’s been a decline in papers referencing an algorithm for multiple rea sons, while a

singular purpose initially waned but later saw an uptick. There is also a noticeable dip in 

papers that mention algorithms with the “simple description ” motive. Hence, in the future, 

tracking the evolving motivations over time may be a potent ial avenue to classify an 

algorithm ’s life cycle and even forecast its future trajectory. 23 

5.3 Effect of time on motivation to mention algorithms 

The analysis in the preceding section highlights how the publication dates of papers that 

discuss algorithms can influence the distribution of motivations for mentioning these 

algorithms. When examining the entire field, the variation in the proportion of sentences 

with different motivational mentions over the years appears minimal. However, a deeper 

look at individual algorithms reveals significant shifts in both the types and proportions of 

motivational mentions. We hypothesize that the relatively minor changes observed in the 

overall distribution may stem from the presence of classical, developing , and emerging    

> algorithms in different years

. These categories represent different stages in the lifecycle of 

algorithms. As such, the amalgamation of various mo tivations across these lifecycle stages 

tends to stabilize the overall distribution of motivati on s, converging towards a relatively 

constant percentage. This pattern suggests that while the field as a whole may exhibit 

stability in motivational distributio n due to the blending of different algorithmic stages, the 

motivations for mentioning specific algorithms are indeed subject to change over time. 

This dynamic underscores the importance of considering the lifecycle stage of an algorithm 

when analyzing the evolution of its mentions and motivations in scholarly communications. 

For a single algorithm, the motivation to mention it shows different trends when the 

papers mentioning it are at different stages of its lifecycle. Firstly, regarding the diversity 

of motivations, unlike the broader domain of NLP, where the diversity of motivations 

increases over time, the proportion of articles mentioning algorithms with a single 

motivation decreases first and then increases. In contrast, the proportion of two or more 

kinds of motivations shows an opposite trend. Secondly, the “use” motivation remains 

relatively stable when considering specific motivation categories. Conversely, the 

percentages associated with “description,” “comparison,” and “improvement” exhibit 

decrea sing trends over time, and “description” experiences the most significant decline. At 

the same time, different classes of algorithms exhibit different distributions of motivation 

in similar life cycle stages. During the stabilization period of grammar algo rithms, the 

proportions of “description” and “comparison” motivations show little difference, and 

“improvement” gradually faded after 2014. In contrast, statistical machine learning 

algorithms and deep learning algorithms exhibit a higher proportion of “description” 

motivations than “comparison” motivation, and deep learnin g algorithms display a more 

pronounced presence of “comparison” and “improvement” motivations .

In summary, Ignoring the nuanced motivations behind the mentions of individual 

algorithms and focusing only on the aggregate within the domain can lead to misle ading 

conclusions . The above analysis reveals that the distribution of motivations for mentioning 

algorithms across the field may be influenced by the algorithms' characteristics, their 

lifecycle stages, and the varying research paradigms of different gene rations. As the time 

factor significantly impacts the motivations associated with each algorithm , when 

developing methods for automatically identifying motivations, incorporating the 

publication time of the papers as a feature in the model training could potentially influence 

the model's performance. Therefore, our future studies will further consider these dynamics 

to avoid confounding the actual influences shaping how algorithms are discussed in 

scholarly literature. 24 

# 6. Conclusion s

This study explores the authors’ motivation for mentioning algorithms in academic papers, 

focusing specifically on the field of NLP . After extensive data extraction of algorithm 

entities and related sentences, we classify the motivations into four categories: 

“description, ” “use, ” “comparison ,” and “improve ment .” Our findings indicate that pre -

trained models outperform other models in the cl assification task. Data augmentation 

further enhance s the model ’s performance while minimizing the need for manual 

annotations. Furthermore, our analysis of the distribution of motivations across eras and 

specific algorithms underscores the pivotal role al gorithms play in scientific research. The 

expectations for algorithm utility in NLP research are becoming increasingly diverse. 

Moreover, when we inspect the motivations of individual algorithms, we notice that 

grammatical and classical machine learning al gorithms predominantly feature simple 

“description s.” In contrast, algorithms garner ing a broader spectrum of motivations are 

typically deep learning methods. 

However, as an initial exploration, our study still has some limitations. Firstly, the 

categoriz ation framework presented is relatively basic. Some nuanced semantic 

expressions, such as “criticism, ” have been bucketed under “description” without further 

differentiation. Future endeavors could aim for a more intricate categorization framework. 

Secondly, in the automatic identification of algorithm entities and motiv ation s of mentions 

in papers, the current study randomly assigns papers pub lished in all eras for model training 

without explicit ly considering the effect of the publication time of the papers, leading to 

possible temporal bias in the results. In our subsequent work, we will try to incorporate 

time as a feature or influence in th e training experiments of automatic identification models. 

Thirdly , we allocated a single motive to every sentence that mentioned algorithms. 

Although these singular motivation assignments cover a vast majority, there are instances 

of extended sentences co ntaining multiple mention motivations . In the future, we might 

explore strategies to segregate motivations within such complex sentences by breaking 

down the sentences or considering the relative positioning of algorithm entities. 

# Acknowledgments 

This paper was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant 

No.72074113). 

# References 

Abbott, A. (2017). The “time machine” reconstructing ancient Venice’s social networks. 

Nature , 546 (7658), 341 –344. 

Abu -Jbara, A., Ezra, J., & Radev, D. (2013). Purp ose and polarity of citation: towards nlp -

based bibliometri cs. Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the North American 

Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin guistics: Human Language 

Technologies , 596 –606. https://aclanthology.org/N13 -1067 .

Azoulay, A. (2019). Toward s an ethics of artificial inte lligence. United Nations , 55 (4), 24 –

25. 

Balcan, M. -F. (2020). Data -driven algorithm design. arXiv Preprint arXiv:2011 .07177 .25 

Beltagy, I., Lo, K., & Cohan, A. (2019). SciBERT: A pretrained language model for 

scientific te xt. Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 

Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language 

Processing (EMNLP -IJCNLP) , 3615 –3620. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D19 -1371 .

Bhatia, S., Tuarob, S., Mitra, P., & Giles, C. L. (2011). An algorithm search engine for 

software developers. Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Search -Driven 

Develo pment: Users, Infrastructure, Tools, and Evaluation , Waikiki, Honolulu HI USA, 

13 –16 .

Blass, A., & Gurevich, Y. (2004). Algorithms: A quest for absolute definitions. In Current 

Trends in Theoretical Computer Science (pp. 283 –311). World scientific. 

https://doi.org/10.1142/9789812562494_0051 .

Breiman, L. (2001). Random forests. Machine Learning , 45 (1), 5–32. 

https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1010933404324 .

ByteBridge. (2021, November 13). Importance of Training Data in Different AI Algorithm 

Stage . Medium. https://becominghuman.ai/the -different -algorithm -stage -the -

differentiated -demand -for -data -b25e16d230d9 .

Chen, J., Huang, H., Tian, S., & Qu, Y. (2009). Feature selection for text classification with 

Naï ve Bayes. Expert Systems with Applications , 36 (3), 5432 –5435. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2008.06.054 .

Cohan, A., Ammar, W., van Zuylen, M., & Cady, F. (2019). Structural scaffolds for citation 

intent classification in scientific publications. Proceedings of the 2019 C onference of 

the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human 

Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , Minneapolis, Minnesota, 

3586 –3596. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N19 -1361 .

Cooper, D. C. (1969). Theory o f recursive functions and effective com putability. The 

Computer Journal , 12 (1), 28 –28. https://doi.org/10.1093/comjnl/12.1.28 .

Cormen, T. H., Leiserson, C. E., Rivest, R. L., & Stein, C. (2009). Introduction to 

Algorithms (3rd ed.). MIT Press. 

Cortes, C., & Vapnik, V. (1995). Support -vector net works. Machine Learning , 20 (3), 273 –

297. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1022627411411 .

Deng, C., Ji, X., Rainey, C., Zhang, J., & Lu, W. (2020). Int egrating machine learning with 

human knowled ge. iScience , 23 (11), 101656. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2020.1 

01656 .

Devlin, J., Chang, M. -W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2019). BERT: Pre -training of deep 

bidirectional transformers for language understanding. Proceedings of the 2019 

Conference of the North American Chapter of th e Association for Computational 

Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,

Minneapolis, Minnesota, 4171 –4186. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N19 -1423 .

Ding, R., Wang, Y., & Zhang, C. (2019). Investigating citation of algorithm in full -text of 

academic articles in nlp domain: a preliminary study. Procee dings of the 17th 

International Conference on Scientometrics and Informetrics (ISSI 2019) , Rome, Italy ,

2726 –2727. 

Feng, S. Y., Gangal, V., Wei, J., Chandar, S., Vosoughi, S., Mitamura, T., & Hovy, E. 

(2021). A survey of data augmentation approaches fo r NLP. arXiv:2105.03075 [Cs] .

http://arxiv.org/abs/2105.03075 .26 

Garfield, E. (1964). Can Citation Indexing Be Automated? Proceedings of the Symposium 

on Statistical Association. Methods for Mechanized Documentation . Washington DC, 

USA, 84 -90. 

Garzone, M., & Mercer, R. E. (2000). Towards an Automated Citation Classifier. 

Proceedings of the 13th Biennial Conference of the Can adian Society for 

Computational Studies of Intelligence , AI 2000 Monté al. Quebec, Canada, 337 –346. 

Genics, T. (2019). Algorithms: Discover the Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence 

Used to Solve Everyday Human Problems, Optimize Habits, Learn Anythi ng and 

Organize Your Life . Trustgenics. 

Guha, S., & Koudas, N. (2002). Approximating a data stream for querying and estimation: 

Algorithms and performance evaluation. Proceedings of the 18th International 

Conference on Data Engineering , San Jose, CA, USA, 567 –576. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE.2002.994775 .

Gupta, R., & Roughgarden, T. (2020). Data -driven algorithm design. Communications of 

the ACM , 63 (6), 87 –94. 

Harwood, N. (2009). An interview -based study of the functions of citations in academic 

writing across two disciplines. Journal of Pragmatics , 41 (3), 497 –518. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pragma.2008.06.001 .

Hickman, L. (2013, July 1). How algorithms rule the world. The Guardian .

https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/jul/01/how -algorithms -rule -world -nsa .

Hou, J., Tang, S., Zhang, Y., & Song, H. (2023). Does prior knowledge affect patent 

technology diffusion? A semantic -based patent citation contribution anal ysis. Journal 

of Informetrics , 17 (2), 101393. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2023.101393 .

Jurgens, D., Kumar, S., Hoover, R., McFarland, D., & Jurafsky, D. (2018). Meas uring the 

evolution of a scientific field through citation fr ames. Transactions of the As sociation 

for Computational Linguistics , 6, 391 –406. 

Kadlec , V. (2008). Syntactic analysis of natural languages based on context free grammar 

backbone [PhD Thesis Specification]. Masaryk University. 

Kobayashi, S. (2018). Contextual Augmentation: Data augmen tation by words with 

paradigmatic relations. Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American 

Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language 

Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) , New Orleans, Louisiana, 452 –457. 

https://d oi.org/10.18653/v1/N18 -2072 .

Kogan, N. E., Clemente, L., Liautaud, P., Kaashoek, J., Link, N. B., Nguyen, A. T., Lu, F. 

S., Huybers, P., Resch, B., Havas, C., Petutschnig, A., Davis, J., Chinazzi, M., Mustafa, 

B., Hanage, W. P., Vespignani, A., & Santillan a, M. (2021). An early warning approach 

to monitor COVID -19 activity with multiple digital traces in near real time. Science 

Advances , 7(10), eabd6989. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abd6989 .

Lei, D., Zhang, H., Liu, H., Li, Z., & Wu, Y. (2019). Maximal Un correlated Multinomial 

Logistic Regression. IEEE Access , 7, 89924 –89935. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2921820 .

Liu, X., Zhang, C., & Li, J. (2023). Conceptual and technical work: Who will disrupt 

science? Journal of Informetrics , 17 (3), 101432. 

http s://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2023.101432 .27 

Lum, K., & Chowdhury, R. (2021). What is an “algorithm”? It depends whom you ask .

MIT Technology Review. https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/02/26/102000 

7/what -is -an -algorithm/ .

Moravcsik, M. J., & Murugesan, P. (1975). So me results on the function and quality of 

citation s. Social Studies of Science , 5(1), 86 –92. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/030631277500500106 .

Qian, Y., Rong, W., Jiang, N., Tang, J., & Xiong, Z. (2017). Citation regression analysis 

of co mputer science publications in different ranking categories and subfields. 

Scientometrics , 110 (3), 1351 –1374. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192 -016 -2235 -4.

Qiu, X., Sun, T., Xu, Y., Shao, Y., Dai, N., & Huang, X. (2020). Pre -trained models for 

natural languag e processing: A survey. Science China Technological Sciences , 63 (10), 

1872 –1897. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11431 -020 -1647 -3.

Raffel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang, S., Matena, M., Zhou, Y., Li, W., & 

Liu, P. J. (2020). Expl oring the limits o f transfer learning with a unified text -to -text 

transform er. arXiv:1910.10683 [Cs, Stat] . http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.10683 .

Safder, I., Hassan, S. -U., Visvizi, A., Noraset, T., Nawaz, R., & Tuarob, S. (2020). Deep 

learning -based extraction of algorithmic me tadata in full -text scholarly docume nts. 

Information Processing & Management , 57 (6), 102269. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2020.102269 .

Sennrich, R., Haddow, B., & Birch, A. (2016). Improving neural machine translation 

models with monolingual data. Proceed ings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the 

Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , Berlin, Germany, 

86 –96. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P16 -1009 .

Stone, H. S. (1971). Introduction to Computer Organization and Data Structures . USA: 

McG raw -Hill, Inc. .

Su, X., Prasad, A., Kan, M. -Y., & Sugiyama, K. (2019). Neu ral multi -task learning for 

citation function and proven ance . arXiv. http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.07351 .

Tang, J. (2021). The next ten -year in AI .

https://keg.cs.tsinghua.edu.cn/jietang/publications/Next -AI10.pdf .

Teufel, S. (2006). Automatic classification of citation function. Proceedings of the 2006 

Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , Sydney, Australia, 

103 –110 .

Thorne, F. C. (1977). The citation index: Another case of spurious validity. Journal of 

Clinical Psychology , 33 (4), 1157 –1161. 

Tuarob, S., Bhatia, S., Mitra, P., & Giles, C. L. (2013). Automatic Detection of Pseudo -

codes in Scholarly Documents Using Machine Lear ning. Proceedings of the 12th 

International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition , Washington, DC, 

USA, 738 –742. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDAR.2013.151 .

Tuarob, S., Kang, S., Wettayakorn, P., Pornprasit, C., Sachati, T., Hassan, S. -U., & 

Haddawy, P. (2019). Auto matic classification of algorithm citation functions in 

scientific literatur e. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 32 (10), 

1881 –1896. https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2019.2913376 .

Vinkler, P. (1987). A quasi -quantitative citat ion model. Scientometrics , 12 (1 –2), Article 

1–2. 28 

Wang, Y., & Zhang, C. (2019). Finding more methodological entities from academic 

articles via iterative strategy: a preliminary study. Proceedings of the 17th International 

Conference on Scientometrics and I nformetrics (ISSI 2019) , Rome, Italy, 2702 –2703 .

Wang, Y., & Zhang, C. (2020). Using the full -text content of academic articles to identify 

and evaluate algorithm entities in the domain of natural language processing. Journal 

of Informetrics , 14 (4), 101091 . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2020.101091 .

Wang, Y., & Zhang, C. (2018). Using full -text of research articles to analyze academic 

impact of algorithms. Proceedings of International Conference on Information, 

Sheffield, UK, 395 –401. 

Wang, Y., Zhang, H., & Zhang, C. (2021). Algorithm entities usage in Chinese academic 

articles from the domain of information science. Proceedings of the 18th International 

Conference on Scientometrics and Informetrics (ISSI 2021) , Leuven, Belgium, 1559 –

15 60. 

Wu, X., Kumar, V., Quinlan, J. R., Ghosh, J., Yang, Q., Motoda, H., McLachlan, G. J., Ng, 

A., Liu, B., & Yu, P. S. (2008). Top 10 algorithms in data mining. Knowledge & 

Information Systems , 14 (1), 1 –37. 

Yang, Z., Dai, Z., Yang, Y., Carbonell, J., Salak hutdinov, R. R., & Le, Q. V. (2019). XLNet: 

Generalized autoregressive pre -training for language understanding. Proceedings of the 

33rd International Conference on Neural Information Processing SystemsDecember ,

Vancouver, Canada, 5753 –5763. 

Zha, H., Chen, W., Li, K., & Yan, X. (2019). Mining algorithm roadmap in scientific 

publications. Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on 

Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining , Anchorage AK USA, 1083 –1092 .

Zhang, C., Mayr, P., Lu, W., & Zhang, Y. (2023 ). Guest editorial: Extraction and 

evaluation of knowledge entities in the age of artificial intelligence. Aslib Journal of 

Information Management , 75(3), 433 -437. 

Zhang, Y., Zhao, R., Wang, Y., Chen, H., Mahmood, A., Zaib, M., Zhang, W. E., & Sheng, 

Q. Z. (2022). Towards employing native information in citation function classification. 

Scientometrics . https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192 -021 -04242 -0.

# Appendix 

Table A. The performance of single models based on the s tandard deviation of 

metrics           

> Model Macro -PMacro -RMacro -F1
> CRF 0. 0976 0. 1341 0. 0861
> Bi -LSTM 0. 1345 0. 1144 0. 1140

Table B. The performance of extraction models based on the training set             

> Model Precision Recall F1
> Bi -LSTM+CRF 0. 9311 0. 9254 0. 9224
> BERT+CRF 0.9 722 0.9 910 0.9 815
> BERT+Bi -LSTM+CRF 0.9746 0.9893 0.9819

29 

Table C. The performance of extraction models based on the validation set 

Model  Precision  Recall  F1

Bi -LSTM+CRF  0.8 938  0.90 76  0.88 94 

BERT+CRF  0.9498  0.9702  0.9599 

BERT+Bi -LSTM+CRF  0.9 702  0.9588  0.9595 

Table D. The performance of statistical machine learning models based on the 

standard deviation of metrics 

Experiment  Model  Macro -P Macro -R Macro -F1

ML experiment I:

TF -IDF 

SVM  0.0389  0.0426  0.0522 

LR  0.0485  0.0565  0.0678 

NB  0.0305  0.0404  0.0423 

RF  0.0542  0.0445  0.0410 

Table E. The performance of deep learning models based on the standard deviation 

of metrics 

Experiment  Model  Macro -P Macro -R Macro -F1

DL experiment I:

Raw data 

BERT  0.0191  0.0221  0.0187 

Sci BERT  0.0341  0.0235  0.0211 

XLNet  0.0266  0.0213  0.0208 

T5  0.0272  0.0266  0.0193 

DL experiment II: 

Augmented data 

BERT  0.0247  0.0244  0.0136 

Sci BERT  0.0278  0.0212  0.0162 

XLNet  0.0330  0.0259  0.0216 

T5  0.0235  0.0281  0.0201